Add exercise sheet for documentation tools chapter (#74)
Simulation-Software-Engineering/Lecture-Material: 04_documentation/code_documentation_tools_exercise.md

# Writing and Publishing Documentation

This exercise is about documentation of projects and codes. We have already added documentation to the [corresponding repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise). It is your task now to generate a website using [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/getting-started/) and to deploy it to [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/).

At the end of the exercise you find a section with hints and remarks. Make sure to check this section.

**TODO** Do we move this deadline to next year? **Thursday, January 13th, 2022, 9:00**

Deadline: **Thursday, December 23rd, 2021, 9:00**

## Documentation Publication Steps

> - Create a copy of the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise). Then, create a new repository on GitHub in your own namespace (account), call it "sse-mkdocs-exercise" and add the files from the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise) to your own repository.

Reviewer: If you recommend the latter approach, you could let them rename the `origin` remote, such that `mkdocs gh-deploy` pushes to their remote.

> - Create a copy of the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise). Then, create a new repository on GitHub in your own namespace (account), call it "sse-mkdocs-exercise" and add the files from the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise) to your own repository.

Author: Honestly, I do not "care" how they do it as long as they get the contents in a repository under their namespace. Nevertheless, you are right that this should be more specific and easier to read.

> - Create a copy of the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise). Then, create a new repository on GitHub in your own namespace (account), call it "sse-mkdocs-exercise" and add the files from the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise) to your own repository.

Author: I clarified this now.

  **Attention** In this exercise you **cannot work with forks** because you cannot use GitHub Pages with forks.
- Follow the instructions from the [MkDocs homepage](https://www.mkdocs.org/getting-started/) to install MkDocs.
- [Create a MkDocs project](https://www.mkdocs.org/getting-started/#creating-a-new-project) from the root of the repository via

  ```bash
  mkdocs new .
  ```

  This will create a MkDocs configuration file `mkdocs.yml` in the root of the repository and a file `index.md` in the `docs/` directory. Make sure to add these new files to Git.

>   You can now create the documentation website locally by running `mkdocs serve`. This builds the homepage and runs a local web server. It will also look for changes to the Markdown files and the `mkdocs.yml` file while it is running to rebuild the website. `mkdocs serve` should print something like the following on the screen

Author: Yes, this would make sense.

  ```bash
  mkdocs serve
  INFO     -  Building documentation...
  INFO     -  Cleaning site directory
  INFO     -  Documentation built in 0.07 seconds
  INFO     -  [10:43:37] Serving on http://127.0.0.1:8000/
  ```

  Copy the address mentioned after "Serving on", in this example `http://127.0.0.1:8000/`, into your favorite browser. A website called "Welcome to MkDocs" should appear that looks similar to the example from the [MkDocs documentation (see below)](https://www.mkdocs.org/getting-started/#creating-a-new-project)

  ![Screenshot from MkDocs Getting Started guide](https://www.mkdocs.org/img/screenshot.png)

  MkDocs should identify our Markdown files inside `docs/` automatically and include them in the generated website. This means that you should find three items in the navigation bar (blue bar at the top) named `Welcome to MkDocs`, `Compilation and Installation` and `How to use the Program`. The names are generated by the top level header of the Markdown files.

  **Note** If you are using MkDocs inside a container, you have to [forward/publish the ports to your Host](https://docs.docker.com/config/containers/container-networking/).

> - Adapt the project documentation such that it the starting/index page contains information about the project. Open the `index.md` file inside the `docs` directory and replace its content with the content of the `README.md`. In contrast to Sphinx, we cannot include the `README.md` from the repository in the documentation.

Author: I am not happy with either solution. Moving the `README.md` into `docs/` is possible and MkDocs also picks up the `README.md` as index file. However, then there is no nice `README.md` in the repository anymore to be rendered by GitHub. So I dislike both approaches. I went for the copying such that the students do not have to waste time adding (more or less) meaningful content to the `index.md` file.

            - Add the `how-to.md` with label `Getting Started`
          You should only have two buttons "Home" and "User Guide" in the generated website.
    - Add the [repository URL](https://www.mkdocs.org/user-guide/configuration/#repo_url). This adds a "Edit on GitHub" button at the top right of the website. Try if this works. If it does not work, this is because older versions of MkDocs set a link to the `master` branch by default, but GitHub calls this branch `main` nowadays. In order to point to the correct branch, set the `edit_uri` setting to `edit/main/docs/`.

        **Note** The "Edit on GitHub" also fails if you have not pushed the corresponding Markdown file to your repository yet.

    - Make yourself the [website's author](https://www.mkdocs.org/user-guide/configuration/#site_author). You can use your real name or your GitHub username. This setting will not change the appearance of your website, but adds the name to the HTML metadata.
- [Deploy your website](https://www.mkdocs.org/user-guide/deploying-your-docs/) to [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/). This consists of following steps:
    - Run `mkdocs gh-deploy` to build and deploy the website:

>       Deployment of the website will create a branch `gh-pages` inside the repository if it does not already exist. This branch contains all files needed to deliver the website. You should not edit any of the files in the branch manually since `mkdocs gh-deploy` will overwrite all changes. Instead, fix problems in your main branch and deploy the website afterwards again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Deployment of the website creates a branch `gh-pages` inside the repository if it does not already exist and pushes it to the default remote. The branch contains all files needed to deliver the website. You should not edit any of the files in the branch manually since `mkdocs gh-deploy` overwrites all changes. Instead, always fix problems in the main branch and deploy the website afterwards again.
```

    - Verify that the "Pages" feature of your repository has been activated. When you are on your repository on GitHub go to "Settings" (at top of window) -> "Pages". It should show an information box " Your site is ready to be published at URL" with the URL to the website of your documentation.

      If the "Pages" feature has not been activated automatically, choose the `gh-pages` branch as source and save/activate the website.

      Check the website. If you get a "404" error

      ```text
      404

      There isn't a GitHub Pages site here.
      ```

>       wait for 5-10 minutes and try again. It takes a while for the website to become visible.

Reviewer: All this was not necessary for me. Webpage was directly up.

Author: When I tried it it took 2-3 minutes. It depends a bit on GitHub and also the nameservers used for the hostname resolution. Also changes might take some time to be visible. The documentation of GitHub Pages states the following

>  It can take up to 20 minutes for changes to your site to publish after you push the changes to GitHub. If your don't see your changes reflected in your browser after an hour, see "About Jekyll build errors for GitHub Pages sites."

[Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/getting-started-with-github-pages/creating-a-github-pages-site)

>     - Add the URL of the documentation to your GitHub project. Go to your repository on GitHub and edit the "About" section at the top-right corner. For editing clock on the small gear symbol. Add the URL in the box "Website".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Add the URL of the documentation to your GitHub project. Go to your repository on GitHub and edit the "About" section at the top-right corner. For editing, click on the small gear symbol. Add the URL in the box "Website".
```

- Verify that your website looks as expected and that the "Edit on GitHub" feature works for all pages.

> - Submit your documentation website via an issue. You cannot submit a pull request since you cannot use a fork in the exercise. You can also add the issue before you are finished in order to ask question. In that case please mention us in the issue such that we get notified. Please write a short note in the issue when you are done and the issue is ready to review. **TODO** Skip this for testing the exercise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Submit your documentation website via an issue. You cannot submit a pull request since you cannot use a fork in the exercise. You can also add the issue before you are done in order to ask questions. In that case please mention us in the issue such that we get notified. Please write a short note in the issue when you are done and the issue is ready to review. **TODO** Skip this for testing the exercise.
```

>     - Create an issue in the [`code-documentation` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Create an issue in the [`documentation-tools-exercise` repository](https://github.com/Simulation-Software-Engineering/documentation-tools-exercise).
```

>     - The issue request should be named `[USERNAME] MkDocs exercise`, e.g., `[jaustar] MkDocs exercise`. Please use the GitLab username here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The issue should be named `[USERNAME] MkDocs exercise`, e.g., `[jaustar] MkDocs exercise`. Please use the GitLab username here.
```

    - Please add a link to your GitHub repository and also a link to your website in the issue.

## Optional Tasks

- [Change the theme](https://www.mkdocs.org/user-guide/choosing-your-theme/#choosing-your-theme) of your documentation. Choose either an integrated theme or a third party theme and/or configure the current scheme differently. Please mention what theme and what settings you have used.
- Add a [GitHub action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/deploy-mkdocs) to automatically deploy your documentation every time a change is pushed to the `main` branch.
- Instead of (only) hosting the documentation on GitHub Pages we can also host the documentation on [Read the Docs](https://readthedocs.org/). You have to make sure to configure [Read the Docs](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file/v2.html#mkdocs) accordingly.

> - Move your documentation from MkDocs and Markdown to Sphinx and reStructuredText. You can follow the steps we from the exercise for this. Create a new repository on GitHub for this called "sse-sphinx-exercise". When you are finished with this and/or need help create a new issue as described above, but name the issue `[USERNAME] Sphinx exercise`. Host your website on Read the Docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Move your documentation from MkDocs and Markdown to Sphinx and reStructuredText. You can follow the steps we know from the exercise for this. Create a new repository on GitHub for this called "sse-sphinx-exercise". When you are done with this and/or need help create a new issue as described above, but name the issue `[USERNAME] Sphinx exercise`. Host your website on Read the Docs.
```
I don't get the sentence

>  You can follow the steps we from the exercise for this.

I guess you mean the lecture?

Author: Which of the sentences?

Author: Ah...  I understand now... :smile:

> - The code in the repository is not documented yet. Add [doxygen-style comments/doc blocks](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html) to the code and generate a suitable configuration to create HTML documentation. You do not have to publish/integrate this website.

Reviewer: How should they document what they did here. Screenshot?

Author: I guess screenshot and adding the doxygen file to the repository.
